So thank you and welcome to session 614.
I know it's pretty late and you all
want to get a hold of some beer,
so I try to make it quick.
The session is about
advanced Java Client.
I want to start out by summarizing
a little bit what we heard
in the session 609 and 606,
and then want to go into a lot more
details about the distribution there.
So let me start by summarizing
what we learned so far.
So Java Client is a technology for
distributed desktop applications.
It's a three-tier architecture.
The client interacts with the user,
displays the user interface.
We use the Java Foundation classes
or Swing for that,
so we are basically platform independent.
The server accesses the database,
and the database is the third
tier which stores the data.
The client never accesses
the database directly.
All the communication from the client
to the database goes through the server,
so the server has complete control
over everything the client is
allowed to do and not allowed to do.
And also what's interesting to
know is that the communication
protocol between client and server,
at least by default, is HTTP,
so you get the connectivity
of an HTML-based application
running in a browser,
but it's a much richer user interface.
And Java Client is mostly
designed for the intranet.
There are a couple of complications
with either the launch time or the
amount of data you need to download
or you need to client installation,
so it's not a good technology for you
to put on high-traffic internet sites.
Now,
Java Client is actually pretty powerful,
and it's very well prepared
for a lot of advanced tasks.
But since we do not have too
much documentation at this time,
a few of the features
are relatively hidden,
but I think you should
really know about them.
So I will try to talk about very
concrete method names this time,
notification names,
and I hope that you can all
take something away from here to
really tune your applications.
So first of all,
I want to go in a lot of detail
about the distribution layer and the
objects in the distribution layer.
I want to talk a little bit about
issues that you have to know
about when you want to go into
deployment with your applications.
And if you save the time,
I'd like to talk a little more about
the controller factory that comes from
actually the Direct to Java Client
side and show you how you can use
it to implement some nice features.
So,
you've probably seen this diagram before.
I don't want to go through
all these boxes again,
but I want to kind of point out
about which of the pieces in this
architecture I'm going to talk.
First of all,
the distribution layer is the layer
that connects the client and the server.
That's where I would
spend most of the time.
And then at the end,
if we talk about the factory,
it would be in the e-generation
layer right at the top.
So let's start with some information
about the distribution layer.
And the most important topic when
it comes to the distribution layer,
to me, is business logic partitioning.
In Java Client,
you can have implementations
of your business logic both on
the client and the server side.
The business objects are fully functional
on both sides of the architecture.
And you have the choice to either
use the same identical business logic
Or you can use what we call
petition business logic.
And petition business logic simply means
that you use different implementations
on both sides of the architecture.
And so far, I always, you know,
when I started talking about it, I said,
you know,
the first thing you can do is you
can restrict the visibility of
properties to the server side,
so that they are not
visible on the client side.
I want to make it a little
more complicated for the
purpose of this session,
because you can also add
additional properties that are
only visible on the client side,
but not on the server side.
Now, how does that make sense?
Well, you know,
sometimes you're not interested
in all the information,
a lot of detailed information,
you're just interested
in derived properties.
So let's say you have an
object that stores dimensions,
right, a width, a height, and a depth.
And on the client,
you really only want to see the
volume of the complete object.
So what you can do is,
you can add an additional
property to your model,
actually, and mark it only as a
client-side attribute.
And then you do not, and width, height,
and depth, so the detailed attributes,
you know, would stay on the server side,
and on the client side,
you only use a derived attribute.
You also have the choice to
use different implementations.
So if you want to perform
computations in different ways,
the implementation of the business
objects you use can be different.
First of all,
that adds a lot of security to your
application because you never send data
or even implementations to the client
that you don't want the client to see.
Now with Java,
you should probably know that
all the classes you send to the
client can easily be decompiled.
So if you have computations,
algorithms that you consider secret,
you don't want it to ever become
public on any client side,
then you can force the client to use
an implementation on the server side.
So you can force the client to
make a round trip to the server,
execute the computation there,
and then just send the end result back.
So no data and no implementation
that you don't want the client
to see will ever go there.
And business logic partitioning
also helps you a lot with
performance optimization,
something that probably today
with really fast client machines
doesn't matter so much anymore.
But if you have very fast server machines
and relatively slow client machines,
you can design your clients
to make use of the computation
power of the server boxes.
As I said, it probably doesn't
matter too much anymore.
But what actually is important is that
you can use business logic partitioning
to minimize the amount of data that is
transferred between server and client.
If you have computations that need
to take a look at a lot of data,
you need to fetch a lot of objects from
the database to just get an end result.
But you only want to
display this end result.
You don't want to send all the detailed
data that you need for the computation.
There's no need for you
to send it to the client.
You just design your client to
make a run-through to the server,
execute the computation there,
and on the way back you
just send the result.
And all the data that is needed for
the computation does not have to be
sent over the wire to the client side.
I actually think that that's one of
the keys to be successful with Java.
You can use Java client that
you find the right partitioning
of your business logic.
The key really is to minimize the
amount of data that is transferred
between client and server.
How do you tell EOF to use
business logic partitioning?
Well, you just go into EO Modeler.
And if you want to use
different implementations,
Usually, well,
you choose a different class.
Usually in EOModeler,
if you look at an entity,
you have a column where
you can enter a class name.
With Java Client, you can actually,
you know, unhide another column called
the client-side class name,
and you actually find it in this
add column pop-up menu that you
see at the bottom of the table.
And in here,
you can specify a different class name.
I don't know whether you can read it,
but in the example that I use here,
you know, the packages are
example.common.creditcard
in the first row,
and it's actually the same on
both client and server side.
But, for example, in the second row,
I use example.server.customer
and example.client.customer.
So, there are two classes, right,
in two different packages,
and on the client,
I use a different implementation
than on the server side.
The other thing you
can do in EO Model is,
if you actually look at
the detail of an entity,
if you look at all the
properties and relationships,
you're probably familiar with the
column to set class properties.
So these are the properties that actually
make it into your business logic,
your business objects.
And for Java Clients,
you can again unhide another column.
You can set the client-side
class properties.
So here, you know, you can, in this case,
I actually restricted the clients,
the visibility of the member
since and the phone attributes.
So they're only visible on the server,
but not on the client.
The methods you use to implement
business logic partitioning are
defined in EU Enterprise Object.
The most important one you probably need
to know about is invoke remote method.
That's the method you
invoke on the client side,
and you use it to basically move the
execution of a method to the server side.
So if you want to go from
the client to the server,
you use invoke remote method.
The arguments you pass are, first of all,
the editing context the object is in,
a method name, the argument types,
and the arguments themselves.
So this is, you know,
the method name and the argument types
identify the method that is supposed
to be invoked on the server side.
If you invoke remote method,
what happens is that the state of the
editing context on the client side is
basically pushed to the server side,
to the editing context
on the server side.
And then the method that you specify
with the last three arguments.
Method name and argument types is
invoked on the server side objects.
So on the equivalent server side object.
And there are two more methods
that are helpful for you.
And they use them on the server side.
And they evade from client update
and prepare values for client.
Those are basically notifications to
the business object that something
has happened on the client side,
that the object has been
updated on the client side.
And you can use it to perform
additional validation,
or you can do computations.
Basically, it's a notification that tells
you the values for this object
were changed on the client side.
And prepare values for client is invoked
right before the object is sent back.
When you send the result
back to the client,
Before the object is
encoded to be transferred,
we invoke prepare values for clients.
If you have derived attributes that
are only visible on the client side,
evade from client update and prepare
values for client are very useful.
You can basically delay the computation
of the direct values until we
invoke prepare values for client.
Again, the order is, on the client side,
you invoke invoke remote method.
On the server side,
evoke from client update is invoked.
Then the remote method
actually is performed.
Before the object is sent back,
we invoke prepare values for client.
There's a very important
naming convention we use for
remote method invocations.
The naming convention is that
if the name of the method
starts with client-side request,
then we considered a method that is open
for unrestricted access from any client.
If your method does not start
with client-side request,
then actually there's a
security mechanism in place,
I'll talk a little more about it later,
that you can use to restrict the
access of methods to certain clients.
Something that is now
possible in WebObjects 5,
but was not possible in WebObjects 4.5,
is that now you can use
common superclasses for your
business logic implementations.
In WebObjects 4.5 or 4.5.1,
the server side was
implemented in Objective-C,
the client side was implemented in Java.
In Objective-C, we had a wrapped API,
so the superclass was in
a server-side package.
So your generic record,
your custom object,
were in the server-side package,
and the client had a different
implementation of the superclass.
So for a client-side business object
and a server-side business object,
you couldn't use a common superclass.
But that's actually possible now,
and that opens the door
for a lot of good design,
actually.
So what I recommend to you is
that you use common superclasses
for the two implementations,
and just define methods abstract that
you want to have different on both sides.
And then you implement a client subclass
with the remote method invocations,
and a server subclass with
the concrete computations.
Let me show you an example.
So this slide shows roughly how
a class secret would look like.
This time I'm subclassing
e-Generic Record.
As you can see,
the package there shows this example.com.
I import comwebobjects.eu.control.
It's just business logic.
I don't need anything more.
Then I would implement
shared functionality,
and all the methods that
I want to have different,
I declare abstract.
For the client side,
I use a different package.
The package is now example.client.
And the class doesn't extend
eugenic record anymore.
It extends my superclass,
the one that I just created,
example.common-secret.
And the implementation of secret value
performs the remote method invocation.
As you can see,
I'm using our naming convention,
client-side request, here,
so that it's a little easier for me.
I don't have to worry about
the security restrictions then.
And the method that
I invoke takes no arguments.
That's why 9 and 9 at the end
of the invoke remote method,
you know, if there are no arguments,
you can just pass 9.
On the server side,
again I use a different package,
example.server.
The class again extends
the common superclass.
And now the method secretValue actually
implements my real business logic.
As you can see,
it's pretty complicated here.
But then there's a second method.
It's client-setRequest secretValue.
So this is the method the
client actually invokes,
and it then invokes the real method.
So this is the design pattern
that I recommend to you.
And this is convenient because
you can write business logic,
your code,
against the abstract superclass,
which is available on both sides.
You don't have to worry
about the concrete package.
If you want to reference the
class from other classes,
from other code,
you would write it against
the shared superclass,
which is abstract.
But since the API is defined
already as abstract methods,
you can compile against it,
and then it happens to resolve
to the concrete subclasses in the
different packages at runtime.
Let's take a look at the
objects that make this happen.
There are four objects
I want to point out to you.
Two on the server side,
Vue Java Client Applet and
EU Distribution Context,
and two on the client side,
EU Distributed Object Store and
EU Distribution Channel,
or actually EU HTTP Channel,
as we'll see later.
The Vue Java Client applet
is a WebObjects component.
Don't get confused with the name
that there's an applet in there.
It's a WebObjects component
living on the server side,
and it's responsible for
generating the applet tag.
It has a lot of bindings,
some specific to the applet,
like the width and the height,
the code base.
But it also has bindings
really specific to Java Client,
for example,
the name of the application class,
the name of the distribution channel,
as you will see later.
If you use Direct to Java Client,
you have a binding that you
can use to specify the class
of the controller factory.
And so the whole Java Client
applet is the object.
They basically represent through
which all the communication
from the client goes.
If the client contacts the server,
it actually talks to this object,
the VoJava Client App that the
WebObjects component that we
instantiated on the server side.
Now, you might wonder how that all
works if you start the client
application as a desktop application,
not as an applet,
if you start it as a desktop app.
Then actually we do create
a whole Java Client applet.
We don't really need it in that case,
but we decided to do it anyway
because it gives you one single place
where you can configure your client.
We basically use the bindings of the
whole Java Client applet that you
can define to both initialize applets
as well as desktop applications.
So the advantage for you is you don't
have to worry about whether your
client runs as an application or
whether your client runs as an applet.
It's the same code path that
is executed all the time,
and there's one place on the server side.
In the code on the server side,
we can initialize or we can specify
all the parameters for the client.
And usually, if you want to change
some of the bindings,
just open the main component,
go into the WebObjectsBuilder
in the inspector and change
all the bindings there.
The other important object on the server
side is the EU distribution context.
The EU distribution context is
the object that performs all the
work when it comes to Java Client.
It's the object that keeps
track of a lot of state.
It tracks which objects have
been fetched by the client.
It's the object that basically takes
care of synchronizing business data
on the client and the server side.
We could have made the Vaujava
Client Applet and the EU distribution
context the same object.
That probably would have been
pretty poor object design.
Second of all, as you will see later,
you actually have the choice to
change the communication protocol.
If you don't want to use
our way of communication,
if you don't want to go through
a Vaujava Client Applet,
you can plug in your own mechanism,
and so you would still use
the EU distribution context.
The EU distribution context is basically
the object that receives messages,
but it just forwards it to
the distribution context,
and the distribution context is
where all the work is performed.
On the client side,
the two important objects
are EODistributedObjectStore
and EODistributionChannel.
The EODistributedObjectStore is
another type of root object store.
It basically replaces the EU database
context that you might be familiar with.
The distributed object store
acts as the parent object store
for all the editing contexts.
So when editing contexts
fetch or save data,
they go through the
distributed object store.
And the distributed object
store basically makes the client
behave like a nested editing
context to the server side.
And every distributed object store,
the distributed object store
uses a distribution channel to
actually perform the communication.
So the distribution channel is
responsible for sending the data
from the client to the server.
And your distribution channel
is actually an abstract class,
and you will usually use the
concrete subclass UHTTP channel.
But if you don't like it,
you can plug in your own
way of communication.
I know that you all like pictures,
so I have one for you.
So if an editing context, you know,
on the client side, fetches data,
it will actually go through
a distributed object store,
which will use the distribution
channel to perform actually the
communication with the server side.
On the server side,
the VoJava Client Applet,
the instance of VoJava Client
Applet that we created,
is the object that receives the request.
It forwards it to the
distribution context,
and that one then, you know,
usually accesses the editing context,
the default editing
context of the session,
to actually, you know,
take a look at the data.
So the four objects that
I introduced to you,
the distributed object store,
the distribution channel,
the VoJava Client Applet,
and the distribution context,
those four objects work together
to connect the editing context
on the client side to the editing
context on the server side.
Now that we know the
distributed object store,
there's actually an
API I want to mention to you.
The EU distributed object store
can easily be found because
it's the root object store.
There's API in EU object store,
default root object store.
Is it that one?
Default, root, parent?
Sorry about that.
You'll find it.
So it's actually very easy to
access the EODC Build Object Store.
And it has a generic API you can use
to perform remote method invocation.
So if you have something you
need from the server that is
not related to business logic,
something that you need
in your application logic,
maybe information about what
kind of resources are available,
maybe you want to handle user
defaults in a special way,
then you can use this method here.
And it takes similar parameters
than the one that we found
on EO Enterprise Object.
It takes an editing context,
the reason I'll talk about in a minute.
It takes a key path that actually
identifies the object on the server
side that receives the method.
If you invoke it on an Enterprise Object,
it's clear which object is the
receiver on the server side.
Because there's one version of
the business object on the client,
one version on the server side,
there's an equivalent on the server side,
so we know exactly where
to send the method.
But for the generic API here,
you have to specify where to send it.
The other arguments, method name,
argument types, and arguments,
we already know.
And there's another flag, push changes.
So the method, the arguments,
editing context, and push changes,
I think you will probably
not need them very often.
But if your remote method invocation is
related to some kind of business logic,
you can pass an editing context,
and this method here will make
sure that the state of that editing
context is synchronized with
the server-side editing context.
So if you need the latest state
of the business logic of the
business data on the server-side,
you can pass the editing context,
and for push changes you'd pass true.
And then the distribution layer
would take care of synchronizing
the state of the editing context
you pass to this method here,
and the editing context
on the server-side.
Let's take a look at the
key path for a moment.
There are three ways you can describe the
target of the remote method invocation.
First of all,
you can pass just null for the key path.
If you do that,
the distribution layer assumes that
you want to invoke the method on
the distribution context directly.
It's pretty rare,
and on our default mutation
of your distribution context,
there's probably nothing
you want to invoke.
But if you use subclasses
of distribution context,
this might come in handy.
More common is probably that
you pass an empty string.
An empty string indicates to
the distribution layer that you
want to invoke a method on what
we call a distribution target.
The distribution context
on the server side has a
registry for arbitrary objects.
You can just add additional
objects to a registry.
And when there's a
remote method invocation,
the distribution context will search
through these targets and find the
first one that implements the method you
described and invoke the method on it.
So these invocation targets
are a very convenient way to
basically extend the functionality
of the distribution context.
There's nothing,
the object can really be arbitrary,
you know, any class does just fine.
It just has to implement the
method you want to invoke,
and the method has to be public,
by the way.
Now the question is,
how do you register additional targets?
Because, you know,
while the server is running,
there are multiple clients
that are instantiated.
There's not just one
distribution context.
For every client,
there's a distribution context.
So to help you,
we send out a notification,
and it's called EO Remote Method Receiver
Needed Notification.
It's a very long name, so use copy-paste.
If you register for this
notification and receive it,
you can use the notification
to add your invocation target.
So basically, you could make,
for example, your application object.
You can register your application
object for this notification.
And then in the notification,
the user info dictionary,
you would actually find the distribution
context that was just created.
So when the client
connects to the server,
you would send out this notification,
and it would contain the
distribution context.
And then you can use it to
add your method receivers.
Yes.
And if you don't pass an I,
and if you don't pass an empty string,
then the distribution layer
assumes that the key path actually
identifies an object relative
to the distribution context.
For example, it could be a session,
right?
A distribution context
has a method session.
So if you specify session, you know,
we would follow the key path, the string,
interpret it as a key path,
starting at the distribution context.
You know,
go to the target and use that one
as the method you want to send the,
that one as the object you
want to send the method to.
Again, even for this generic API,
we use the naming convention
client-side request.
So if your method name starts
with client-side request,
it's open for unrestricted access.
We'll talk a little bit more
about distribution channels.
As I said, the distribution channels are
responsible for transferring the
data between client and server.
And as I said, there's an abstract class
e-distribution channel,
and there's a concrete
subclass e-HTTP channel.
You will probably, on most of the cases,
you will stick with the e-HTTP channel.
If you don't like it at all,
you can implement your own
subclass of e-distribution
channel and use that instead.
It's fairly complicated, so if you can,
try to stick with the e-HTTP channel.
If you want to change the class
of the distribution channel,
there's a binding in the Vore
Java Client applet that you can change,
and there you can specify the new
class name that you want to use.
On your HTTP channel,
there's one method that
is particularly important,
because if you want to do things
like connecting through SSL,
you can override this one method here,
createSocket.
You pass the protocol of the URL,
the host name,
and the port number to create
a different kind of socket,
for example, an SSL socket.
Now, I'd actually like to show you
an example running through SSL,
and I'd like to ask Norbert
Schatz to come up on stage
and drive the demo for me.
So if you could switch
to the demo machine.
For our demo purposes here,
we used a package called JSSE that
you can download from Sun's website.
It's basically some kind of a reference
implementation for a secure socket layer.
And we have the code that we had
to write on the client side for
the channel here on the screen.
So as you can see,
there's a class SSL channel
extending our UHTTP channel.
And if you focus for a moment
on the createSocket method,
we first check whether
it's actually using HTTPS.
If not, we just use the
superclass implementation.
So this distribution channel
actually supports both protocols.
And if it's HTTPS,
then the only thing we have to
do is to use the JSSE classes
to create an SSL socket.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, I think now we'd just like to
run the application just so
that you know that it works.
So the server is starting.
And so far, we obviously used this
Java Client Launcher program.
I think it's minimized in the dark,
so it's at the right side.
This time we want to show you
actually the script that we're using.
So we wrote in a script,
and it's very simple.
It's based on the script that
WebObjects generates for you anyway if
you compile Java Client applications.
We always create a launch script
for you for the server side,
but we also create a
script for the client side.
We just use that one.
And then the difference is,
if you pass in the URL, as you can see,
we use HTTPS.
And if you pass additional arguments,
which is just channel class name,
and there's our new channel class.
So let's execute the script.
And hopefully in a second we will
see an application that we just
generated with the assistant.
It's nothing fancy
about that application,
but it connects to SSA.
So there's actually not a lot
of code you have to write on the
client side to make that happen.
It actually turned out to us that
it's much more complicated to
configure Apache to allow us to do
SSL than to implement the client side.
[Transcript missing]
Let's switch back to the slides.
Thank you.
A lot of features,
a lot of the hooks that you need
to use are implemented or available
to you in the form of delegates.
There are two objects where
you can set a delegate to.
One is on the server side,
one is on the client side again.
On the server side is on
the EU distribution context.
There are various delegate
methods you can implement.
Just to list what you can do.
First of all, you can encrypt and
decrypt the communication.
So every byte that is sent
between client and server,
you can apply your own
encryption mechanism to.
I think it's probably more
convenient for you to just use
SSL or something like that.
If you want to implement your
own encryption mechanism,
you have delegate methods where you
can control every single byte that
is sent between client and server.
You can also control the access of the
client when fetching business objects.
Basically,
there's a delegate method where you
can control exactly which objects
the client's allowed to fetch.
So if you don't want to make objects
of an entity visible to the client,
you can just delegate and just say, no,
you can't see that.
Sorry.
The third hook you have in the
delegate is that you can restrict the
invocation of remote method invocations.
If you don't follow the naming
convention clients at request,
then by default we do not allow the
clients to invoke any other method.
But you can use the delegate to
open up the method invocation.
So for every remote method invocation
that the client tries to perform,
the delegate will be notified and can,
on a client basis,
determine whether this method can
be executed on the server or not.
So those are pretty strong
security features here.
On the client side of the
e-distribution channel,
you can also handle
encryption and decryption,
but this is the other way around.
Both client and server
obviously need to work together,
otherwise you get a lot of mess.
So, the second piece is,
the second hook in the delegate
of the distribution channel is
that you can deal with exceptions.
There are two types of
exceptions you can get.
One is an I/O exception,
something went wrong
with your communication,
right, maybe you can't open a socket,
you know,
maybe the network just went down,
something like that.
If there's an exception like that,
the delegate can handle it,
it can try to reconnect maybe,
but it's up to you.
But there's another type of
exception that happens quite often,
and that is that something on the server,
right, there's nothing wrong
with the communication,
but there's an exception
raised on the server side.
Maybe a validation error, right,
maybe a validation method
on the server side,
the business logic on the
server side raised an exception.
[Transcript missing]
The timing is pretty important
for setting the delegates,
because especially if you do
encryption and decryption,
you have to make sure that the
delegates are in place before
the first byte is transferred.
The delegate needs to be in place
on both sides of the architecture.
So the best way for you to set delegates
is on the server side by registering
for another type of notification.
It's the e-distribution context
instantiated notification.
You send it out whenever we
create an e-distribution context,
and there you can set a delegate.
And on the client side,
the best way for you to set the
delegate of the distribution channel
is by using a subclass of your
application and going to the constructor.
It's really the only place that
you have to plug in your own logic
before we make the first round trip.
If you don't do
encryption and decryption,
you can do it later.
But if you use encryption and decryption,
then you would have
to use an application.
your application subclass.
I'd like now to talk a little
bit more about deployment issues.
First of all, I'd like to go over the
system requirements.
For the server side,
a Java Client server application is
a standard WebObjects application.
Wherever you can deploy
a WebObjects server,
you can deploy a WebObjects
server for a Java Client.
On the client side,
the only thing we require is JDK 1.3.
That does contain Swing now.
That was different in earlier times,
the JDK 1.1.8.
Now JDK 1.3 contains Swing,
so there's no need to
download it anymore.
On MacOSX,
MacOSX is probably the best
platform to deploy Java Client
applications because JDK 1.3 is
integrated in the operating system,
very convenient.
On Windows, you would have to download
it from some website.
And unfortunately, on MacOS 9,
there's no JDK 1.3 support,
so you will not be able to deploy there.
The two options you have with
Java Client for deployment are
desktop applications or applets.
If you deploy as a desktop application,
you will create a little launch program.
On MacOSX,
you will probably use Project Builder,
or there's another tool
called MRJ App Builder.
On Windows,
you will probably just create a
little launch script and then create
a shortcut to it from the desktop.
If you deploy as an applet on MacOSX,
again, it's relatively easy.
You would probably use Internet Explorer,
which comes with the system.
And browsers on MacOSX use
the Java VM that comes
with the operating system.
That's pretty nice.
On Windows, for both IE and Netscape,
you would probably be required
to use the Java plugin.
For IE, Microsoft has not committed
to JDK 1.2 or 1.3 support.
I think Netscape has,
but it depends on the version
of Netscape that you use.
So the best way around this
is to use the Java plugin,
which Sun provides.
Again,
it can be downloaded from Sun's website.
It's available to everybody.
And Java Client is actually
pretty smart about this.
It uses JavaScript to detect
the client configuration.
So we do the right thing for you.
You can just say, yes,
please use the Java plugin.
You'll find out that if it's on MacOSX,
you don't have to use it.
It's integrated in the operating system.
If it's on Windows, for IE and Netscape,
you do the right thing.
Users will be pointed
automatically to Sun's website.
They can download the plugin,
and then everything is fine.
Just to show you how easy it
is to create a launch program,
I'd like to ask Norbert to come up again.
And what we want to do is we want
to create a launch program for
the application we just generated,
the SSL that we just demoed before,
the SSL demo.
And that's actually pretty nice because
we can demo a few features of the new
project builder that come in very handy.
So the first thing we do
is we create a new project.
And this time, we just choose a
Java application template.
It's not even a WebObjects template.
You give it a name.
Call it SSL Launcher.
And this is a pretty simple project.
It has a Java class.
It has an icon file,
so you can drag in your
own icon if you want.
This is the default IKB we get.
And there's the properties file.
And we will go ahead and change
some of these properties.
Actually, we already wrote them.
[Transcript missing]
Let's take a moment because there
are actually a lot of classes that
need to merge together in one Java.
[Transcript missing]
And it won't look very
different from before,
but the nice thing is now we
have a desktop application.
It's self-contained.
We can take this one app.
We can ship it to the client.
That's all we have to do.
Very nice.
What's happening?
There it is.
So there's our client.
Nothing special about it.
Okay, thank you, Norbert.
Could switch back to the slides.
Okay, I'd like to go again to the
deployment options and compare
the two deployment options.
This is basically going to be a
repetition of what we've heard so far,
but I think it's very
important to understand.
So the biggest advantage of
an applet is the simplicity
of the client installation,
because when the applet starts up,
it downloads all the classes from
the server side that it needs
to execute the client program.
So if you want to
upgrade your application,
if you want to ship a new
version of the client,
you just have to install the
new classes on the server side,
and when the clients
start up the next time,
the applets,
they just pick up the new classes,
so that's very convenient
for you to handle.
With applications,
you first of all have to
create this launch program,
and then you have to
install it on the client.
And on the client,
you have to have all the Java classes
available on the client side.
So if you want to upgrade,
you're in a little bit of trouble because
you have to make sure that all your
end users upgrade to the new version.
So the advantage of the applet
is really that installation
and upgrading is so easy.
On the other side,
the applications provide a
much better user experience,
which is much more convenient for the
user to have a desktop application
that can be accessed through an icon
on the desktop that is completely
embedded in the desktop environment.
You can hide the application,
you can minimize windows,
you have access to service menus.
You don't have that with applets.
So the user experience... is much nicer.
Also, applications perform a
little better than applets.
That's mostly because
applications run very isolated.
Applets in one browser,
multiple applets in one browser
actually share the same Java VM.
So they can have all kinds
of negative side effects,
both on the performance
and the stability side.
That's not something you would be happy
about as an application developer.
But applications are isolated.
If another Java application is running,
it doesn't affect us.
If it crashes,
if it does something bad with the system,
it doesn't affect the Java application.
Also from your perspective,
as the application developer,
you don't have to deal with security
restrictions on the client side.
In AppLess,
there's a security manager in place
that usually prevents untrusted
code to access the file system.
But applications,
you don't have to worry about that
because there is no security manager.
You can do everything you
need to do on the client side.
End users might see
that a little different,
and that's why it's
got a little dot here.
Because, you know, with AppLess,
they know if it's untrusted code,
that the Java VM will prevent the AppLess
from messing around with the computer.
So they might actually
like to execute AppLess.
This other side,
if you're in intranet environments,
it probably doesn't matter so much
because hopefully your end users
trust the system administrator
to pass out good software.
The last thing that can come
in very handy with applications
is that you have full control
over all the Java VM parameters.
If you need a special heap size,
or you actually want to choose
the VM you want to execute in,
you can do so with
applications and applets.
You don't have any control over that.
A good compromise from my perspective is,
when it comes in regards to
installation and upgrading,
to use a special class loader
for the client application.
The base system doesn't
change that often.
The base system would be the JDK 1.3
and all our UF Java Client classes.
So it's actually a very good idea to
install those classes on the client side.
And then to download all the classes
that are specific to your application.
That's actually exactly what we
do with this Java Client Launcher
that we used in the previous demos.
We didn't have to configure
the client in any special way.
The reason was that it contacted
the server first of all,
asked it what kind of classes
are specific to this client,
downloaded those classes even
before it went into the EUF code.
So that's very convenient because the
base system doesn't change that often.
It's on the client.
But you still get a fair amount of
upgradability with the special class
loader because you can upgrade the
client classes on the server side.
You can make it available
on the server side.
And you only take a small hit because
there are usually not that many
specific classes to your application.
It's maybe 50 classes or so.
And that's pretty quick to download.
So you probably take a hit of one
to three seconds at startup time.
But the benefit for you to be able
to upgrade the client applications
quickly and fix bugs in an elegant way
without having to worry about shipping
another installer and making sure that
all the clients really install it,
that's quite compelling.
The next two points,
session timeouts and server instances,
I receive a lot of questions about that.
So Java Client on the server
side uses normal Vose sessions.
When the client connects,
you create a Vose session object,
and sessions time out.
That's usually not a problem,
except that users of desktop
applications usually don't expect that.
I mean,
if I'm running an app in a browser,
I can understand why
a session time's out.
But if I use a desktop application
that I just double-clicked,
I don't usually see this
concept of session timeouts.
So to help you,
Java Client explicitly notifies the
server if the user quits the application.
So what that means is that if
the client is terminated cleanly,
so the user chooses the quit command,
then it will actually make a
round trip to tell the server,
hey, I'm gone, and the server will then
clean up that session.
So for most of your clients,
you shouldn't have to worry about
the session not terminating,
because it will explicitly
notify the server.
The only sessions that might
stay around is if maybe the
network connection went down,
the user decided to kill the application,
something like that.
So there might be a few sessions
of not-cleanly terminated
applications that stay around,
but that shouldn't really bother you.
So the best way to leave the
session timeouts is to use event.
So that's a very large timeout,
maybe 24 hours, maybe 48 hours.
That way, users that started the
desktop application,
started in the morning,
then maybe they went for lunch,
come back three or four hours later,
maybe had a few meetings in between,
but they don't face session timeouts,
and it shouldn't really concern
you that the sessions are around.
Let's talk about server
instances for a moment.
With Java Client,
you can scale the server
side in the normal way,
like with every other
WebObjects application.
If you serve a lot of
clients at the same time,
just use multiple server instances.
I'd like to give you a little more
information so that you can better
understand what's going on with clients,
some information that might
help you to determine how many
server instances you need.
The first thing you should know
about Java Client is that there's
usually a very high load at startup.
Often there are classes
that have to be downloaded,
especially if you run as applets.
If you use Direct to Java Client,
there's some kind of
UI information being exchanged.
Also, users usually start out in
the beginning to search for
objects they want to work with.
So there's usually a
high load at startup,
and then afterwards, it's usually just
relatively small packages.
And actually,
for the same amount of data,
the communication with Java Client,
the package size for the data,
is much smaller than the HTML.
So if you have five objects
you want to display in HTML,
or the HTML around it,
if you compare that to the encoded data,
the encoded stream of data
that we use for Java Client,
the Java Client stream
is much more compact.
It's really nicely
compacted business data.
Now,
the fact that the packages are smaller
doesn't mean that you will never
have a problem with communication.
And what I would like to
point out is that usually,
in intranet applications,
the amount of business data that the
client wants to access is much larger.
Okay, and I think we actually
do have enough time,
so I'd like to talk a little more
about the Controller Factory.
The controller factory is the object in
the center of Direct to Java Client's
dynamic user interface generation.
It's the object that's responsible
to communicate with the server
to request a description of
the client-side user interface.
It's responsible for instantiating
all the controller hierarchies
that we use on the client-side.
But the controller factory is
not only useful in dynamically
generated applications.
You can make use of it.
It's actually very convenient
sometimes to mix dynamically
created user interfaces and
statically generated user interfaces,
so libfiles that you generate
in the interface builder.
The factory provides--
A good amount of API that you can use
to retrieve additional configuration
information from the root system.
[Transcript missing]
There's also more low-level
API to retrieve what we
call primitive controllers.
You can consider a primitive controller
to be a small unit in the UI,
basically related to
one entity and one task.
So, for example, in the query window,
you usually have a little
query primitive controller and
a list primitive controller.
Every query pane in the query
window will usually consist
of two primitive controllers.
And there's a pretty large API.
I just listed a few methods here.
Query controller with entity,
list controller,
and form controller with entity,
which you can use.
And I'd actually like to show
you how you can use these methods
to implement some nice features.
So Norbert is coming up again.
Could we please switch
to the demo machine?
So here we have a prepared application,
and I think we first want to start it.
So the server started,
and now we use the Java Client
Launcher again to launch the client.
So we're connecting to the server now.
See,
the nice thing about this Java Client
Launch is that we can even launch the
client before the server is there,
because it will wait until all
the classes are downloaded,
right?
It will wait until we connect
and then download the classes,
and then start,
then jump into the real EUF code.
So here's our application.
It looks pretty normal.
Why don't you move that window
a little more to the left?
And it looks like basically a window we
could have created with the Assistant.
There's a special menu item in
this application that we added.
It's called Configure.
And we get a configuration tool,
which happens to look very similar
to the Assistant that we usually use.
Now let's just have Norbert play around
a little bit there and see what happens.
So he's removing some
of the attributes there.
And then he's switching to List.
OK, doing the same thing there.
Now watch the window on the left
side when we press the Apply button.
So the UI automatically actually
configures to this new layout.
So what we kind of simulate here is a
UI where the end user can actually choose
what kind of data he or she wants to see.
It's like a user-configurable UI.
Let's take a look at the source
code we had to write for that.
So why don't you quit the client?
OK, that's fine.
So the class, interesting, is JC dynamic,
which is a subclass of
UI Interface Controller.
And that's all the code we had to write.
So the important method here
is update user interface.
We invoke it both in the constructor
of the interface controller,
and it's also invoked when we press
on the apply button in this tool,
in the configuration tool.
And as you can see,
the only thing we do is if
there is already an editor,
we remove the old one.
then we create a new one that we
have with the controller factory.
And actually, the primitive controller,
you know, it's one controller with
multiple subcontrollers.
It's a little hierarchy of
controllers that is responsible for,
you know, this editor part.
And we search the list
controller in there.
So we use a method on EU controller.
It's called controller
with key value pairs,
which this is a method that walks
through a hierarchy of controllers,
you know, and looks for a matching
controller for this key value pair.
And then we just set a relationship path.
So that's basically the
connection of the list controller,
you know, the detail controller
to the master interface.
And we add the subcontroller.
So that's all the code we
have to write for that.
So the controller factory is really
useful for you if you want to have
some kind of user configurable UI.
And why don't you press
on the JC application.
So this is code that would be
much more complicated for you.
You would obviously have to come
up with a real tool for the user
to enter the configuration data.
But we made it easy.
We just used some kind of a
simplified assistant here.
And the most important piece, actually,
if you scroll up again--
[Transcript missing]
So just to repeat what we did,
if you want to come up with
a user-configurable UI,
you would have to actually
use the rule system.
I mean,
we would use a dynamically generated
piece in the user interface.
So you would have to write a
rule to retrieve the list of
properties the user really chose.
So you would have to create
some kind of a database,
a configuration store.
It could be in the file system.
It can be in the database.
And in the interface file-- oh, actually,
sorry.
I forgot about that.
Could we switch-- do you
still have that open in IB?
Just close.
Okay.
It doesn't matter.
What we did in the interface file is we
basically created it with the assistant
and then just removed the whole lower
portion of the lib file and replaced it
with an empty box with an NS custom view.
And we told the interface
controller that this is the
so-called sub-controller area.
The sub-controller area is a way for
us to point the controller to a view
where all the sub-views of dynamically
generated UIs should be placed.
And so we have to write a rule in
the rule system to retrieve the
list of properties on a user basis.
We would have to go
into the interface file,
basically remove everything that
we want to create dynamically.
We would replace it with an empty box.
And then we have to write
a little bit of code that
dynamically swaps sub-controllers.
And as I said,
we use the API in the factory to
retrieve primitive controllers.
So for example,
this controller with the entity.
And then obviously,
and probably the most complicated part,
you would have to write a tool,
like a preferences panel,
so that the user can configure the data.
It's fine, don't worry.
Okay, so in summary,
Java Client is very powerful.
It's prepared for a
lot of advanced tasks.
The most important objects are the
EODistributionContext on the server
side and the EODistributedObjectStore
on the client side.
I also mentioned the VotJavaClient
applet and the EODistributionChannel.
I think most of the time you
will not work with them directly,
but you use the EODistributionContext
and the EODistributedObjectStore
and the delegates for those objects.
Distribution channels are customizable.
It's actually pretty easy.
It's your sort of plug-in SSL.
Again,
you have multiple options to deploy.
You can deploy as a desktop
application or as an applet.
And the controller factory
is a useful thing to look at,
even if you don't want to leave
the traditional development.
If you still want to work with
interface files and generate most
of the pieces of the UI by hand,
the controller factory
might make your life easier.
It's really worth to take a look at it.
Okay, I think typical slides at the end.
The lab actually closes now.
It's open tomorrow again at 10:30.
Please vote for WebObjects
as the best app server.
Those are the persons to contact: Tony,
our director, and Bob in product
marketing and iServices.